People in power who haven't understood
their why can lead us down some dark
tunnels. We are in a really tough time
right now. The one and only Michelle
Obama, the former first lady, and her
brother Craig Robinson are sharing their
rare perspectives into a world very few
ever get to see. I grew up in a
predominantly black neighborhood and we
were taught foundational values so that
we could function in our society. But
growing up, I was just checking boxes.
And then I met Barack Obama. He showed
up in my life as the opposite of a box
checker. You rejected him at first,
right? Yeah. I was even trying to
introduce him to some of my friends. He
said, "Well, why don't we go out?" And
what did you think of him? Honestly, I
was like, "He may last 2 months." I
remember my mom saying, "Well, at least
he's tall."
But the next thing, you know, we were on
our way to building our lives together.
And my initial reaction was, don't do
this. There would be death threats. How
do you raise kids in the White House?
How would we afford it? Did you ask for
any promises if he were to win? I didn't
know what that journey was going to be
and what I would need to negotiate for
myself. And if I had known what I know
now, I should have said, Michelle, I was
watching the coverage of your decision
to not go to Trump's inauguration. What
was the thinking behind that?
The truth was is that
this has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guest
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much. Michelle Craig, what do I need to
know about your earliest context to
understand the adults? And I use that
word intentionally because I know that's
what your your parents were intent on
raising. The adults that are in front of
me today.
Wow. that starts at 7436 South Ullet,
you know, the the the hub of it all.
That was the the home that we grew up in
on the south side of Chicago. And it was
a teeny tiny house. Uh we lived uh above
our aunt Robbie. It was a single family
home, a bungalow on the south side of
Chicago. And our aunt Robbie was married
to uh her husband Terry and they owned
the home. Uh, and they had a little
bitty almost one-bedroom, two-bedroom
apartment over the home. So, it was a
two family home. We were surrounded by
extended family. That community of
people that you probably because people
didn't have a lot of resources, people
lived with each other. You know, you
shared spaces, you lived next to one
another. and we lived with our great
aunt because it helped our parents save
some money and get us in a better
neighborhood because my father was a
city worker. He was a working-class guy,
didn't have a college education, and
working for the city was a really stable
job because it gave you benefits and
some stability. And my mom wanted to
stay home uh and and raise kids. So, in
order to save that kind of money, we
banned together and lived with our aunt
Robbie. and all of the adventures and
the lessons learned when I think about
my foundational values that house really
and all the experiences and
conversations. The beginning of my
kitchen table happened on 74th in Uclid
and I I talk about it because you think
it was a palace but this was a little
home. We shared a bedroom most of our
lives because there would just wasn't
room for us to each have our own room.
And we shared the space, one bathroom.
There was no dining room. There was just
a kitchen. And the way it was set up,
how it was supposed to be used, it was a
one-bedroom apartment.
And the living room was the room that we
shared as a bedroom. And the one bedroom
it had was where my mom and dad lived.
And the whole thing could have been 700
square f feet. Yeah. You talked about
foundational values. Mhm. What were
those foundational values that you
learned in that location?
And how did your parents teach you those
foundational values? And I asked that
with great curiosity because as I read
through both of your
books, there are moments in your career
where as adults in your late 20s where
those values show up so clearly over and
over and over again. And I'm I was as I
was reading I was thinking gosh what did
their parents do to orientate them in
such a clear way where both at key
moments in both of your careers you make
decisions not to get a pay rise or not
to go for the thing that is higher
status and to do something else either
something that's aligned with your
passions and hobbies or something that's
in service of others.
So what were those values and how did
your parents instill those in you? I I
think our parents modeled it. I mean, if
I were to think of
one one word that would describe my
father, he was just a decent man.
Decent, honest, hardworking, and loyal,
trustworthy. I mean, these were the kind
of things that we talked about. We we
didn't have material stuff. He couldn't
provide that, but he provided a set of
lessons about what it meant to be a good
friend. Um he was the elder in his
family uh the oldest of what five and my
mom was the middle child. And uh he he
took care of everyone. Um even though he
had multiple sclerosis and walked with
assistance. He had a cane when we were
younger. I never knew my father to walk
without the assistance of a cane. And MS
was a progressive disease. So over the
course of his life, he just got weaker
and weaker and weaker, but he was the
strongest person in our orbit with
everyone. Never took a sick day. Never
took a sick day. He was the father that
fathered all the other kids in the
neighborhood, you know. So when Craig
was playing basketball, he was the
person that was at most of the practices
if he could be if his shift allowed. he
was the dad in the neighborhood where a
lot of kids didn't have those kind of
role models. Um, and even though we
didn't have a
lot, you know, there was there was never
a time when my father wasn't going to
help somebody. So, you know, I guess
those values where you you you take care
of people, you know, money doesn't
really matter. That's not the thing that
makes you great. It's how you show up in
the world. It's your word. It's um you
know how you treat other people. To
Misha's point, he was the guy who was
giving kids rides to practice and to
games because their parents couldn't go
and he would be sharing stories, sharing
his values. It was just embedded in his
being to pass on knowledge that he had.
And and with regard to my mom, you know,
my mom, I think, is where I at least
where I get my philanthropic gene from,
not with money cuz we didn't have any,
but with our time and with our resource,
whatever resources we had. What was
behind all of this was unconditional
love.
It's a tool in the toolbox that you
sometimes don't even realize is there if
you're privileged enough to, right?
because it's that tectonic plate that
sits underneath you that you never can
really see, but gives you a certain
sense of I guess risk and and uh go get
it. Well, and and knowing that, you
know, it's not just unconditional love,
but our parents believed us. They valued
our voices. I mean, they really liked to
hear us talk. They they encouraged us to
think out loud and to problem solve and
to come to us with their problems but
not be the ones that were going to solve
it. And I and this came in very handy
when you're a kid in public school
because you know in public school south
side of Chicago teaching was kind of
uneven. You know one year you'd get a
teacher that cared and and invested in
the kids. Another grade you'd have a
teacher that didn't care. And I remember
distinctly I started second grade and I
went to a classroom that was completely
chaotic. The teacher clearly didn't want
to be there. And I knew this in second
grade. And there was no order. We didn't
have homework. We weren't doing regular
lessons. And I knew that something was
wrong. And I would come home at lunch
and I'd complain about we nothing
happened today at school, you know, and
I'm I don't know what second grade is
supposed to be, but I don't feel like
I'm getting what I need to get out of
second grade. It took a month of coming
home and complaining. And my mom was
quietly listening. But she wasn't just
listening, she was plotting. And it was
a month in, she went up to the school,
watched herself, and saw that this
teacher not only wasn't teaching, but it
appeared that she didn't even like kids.
So, she went to the principal's office
and read them the riot act. I don't know
what she said or what she did, but three
of us were pulled out of the class for
testing. And I just remember I just
didn't have to go into that class. And I
spent a couple of weeks taking some
specialized test. We were just doing
bubble tests. didn't know what it was.
Um, got the results and the results
proved that I could skip second grade
and it was a lifesaver for me. But I'll
never forget my mom finally did. I would
hear her complaining of my dad, this
teacher, you know, these teachers who
don't care about these kids. She had
gotten us out, but she was worried about
the kids who were stuck in that second
grade class, who didn't have parents who
were their advocates, who, you know,
were going to spend probably a wasted
year in second grade missing whatever
they were going to miss. But that was
one of those instances where I knew that
if a cry for help from me was heard by
my mother and acted upon, she could have
been one of those mothers who said,
"Well, just, you know, life is life.
Just get it together." But she knew
there was something different in what I
wanted and what I needed and she, you
know, she made it happen. Does that
teach you to respond to others who cry
for that help? I probably does. I mean,
I still think about the kids who were
left behind. I mean, there's just
something that that really touches me
about kids who are as bright as we are
because we grew up with them. You know,
my mother saw them. Uh, and the only
difference between me and them was that
they had a mother that cared. And a lot
of their lives looked totally different
from ours because of that. And I find
myself being that advocate for those
kids, those the the kids who were
underestimated and under supported. And
that turns out to be kids, most kids all
over the world. So I do find that that
moment for me was a defining in in a
pretty fundamental way about how I how I
fight for kids and the way that I saw my
mom fight for me
race. One of the um startling things
with these two photos Mhm. mainly
because I think it's this way round but
um
this is I believe what second grade or
something that was first grade. first
grade and then this is seventh eighth
seventh or eighth grade. Yeah. Yeah.
There's a lot less white people in the
second photo which means that which
assumes that white people started
leaving your school. Oh, absolutely.
They leaving the neighbor leaving the
whole of Southshore. My my question
really is about what role did race play
in your childhood? Because I think about
my own childhood and it's quite a
prominent persuasive force in who I
became and what I thought about the
world and really what I thought about
myself. So race is an issue as young
people in Chicago. What role did it
play?
I think there was a lot of race pride in
our family. Um there was this
feeling this understanding that um uh
because of people's prejudice, there
would be a lot of white people that
would underestimate you, that would
mistreat you, that would assume things
about you. our family, our entire family
on both
sides, really smart, talented, gifted
people to have a family that big and to
have and but all workingclass people,
right? So, we lived among sort of real
regular excellence, you know? I mean,
people who were teachers and who were
who were engineers, all of our cousins
were people who were expected do to do
well in school. So, we were taught like
no one's better, smarter than you. You
know, you're capable. My father was that
voice for a lot of our cousins if they
didn't have that kind of energy in their
lives. It was always like, you got this
and you know what you're doing. So, in
our home, there was race pride. But when
you, you know, live in a, when we moved
into Southshore into Robbie's house, our
aunt Robbiey's house, most of my
neighborhood friends were white kids.
Um, Rachel Dempsey and Susan Yaker and
uh, Sof Sophenant Conupant who was a
Korean girl because we lived by a
hospital and her mother was a nurse. So
it was a very mixed the the stewards who
were you know they they were a black
family but could pass for white. I mean
it was just sort of some of everyone in
the neighborhood. Miss Mason who was the
little white lady across the street and
our neighbors were the Mendozas, the
Mexicans. Um you know it was sort of
everywhere all around us and everyone
got along. Neighbors knew one another.
We played with each other. I went to
Rachel's house and for lunch and you
know, but then one year it was like the
lights went off for the white people and
they were gone without a trace. They
call this white flight. This was white
flight and action. Yeah. Yeah. For
anyone that doesn't have context on
white flight, what is white? It's the
sociological occurrence of what happens
in communities when black people sort of
start making their way up
socioeconomically and can buy homes or
rent homes in neighborhoods that are
predominantly white. So instead of uh
white people accepting it, they sell
their homes on mass. There's a sort of
undercurrent of we better get out
because these black families coming in
are going to ruin the neighborhood and
bring down property values. So you
better sell now and go go further south
into the southern suburbs. And so when
you're young, you you kind of know
something is going on. You know, it's
not like we were sitting around the
kitchen table talking about white
flight. But what you do know and you
take in as a child is like these people
are running from
us. You know, it's like my dad who is
this, you know, amazingly kind and
generous person who would would have
been good for a lot of these people's
kids, these white folks kids to get to
know and be around us who turned out to
be who we were and we were always going
to be that. You're running for us. Well,
our feeling was like, well, how stupid
is racism and how stupid are you for not
really looking and getting to know? So,
so race to me and in my household was
just a dumb manifestation of ignorant
people, but we were taught to keep
moving through it. How do you stop it
getting to you? One of the remarkable
things I noticed even when we spent some
time together yesterday
was there is no apparent bitterness. And
there's one would say that there's
reason to be because when you're so
powerful and so prominent and so well
known, you're exposed to everything. And
going through that experience in those
early years and then going through the
everything that happened thereafter,
there doesn't appear to be any
bitterness. There doesn't appear to be
any chip on the shoulder, any anger.
Yeah. Sometimes there is. Yeah, we just
don't show it. We just don't show it.
But I I will say at least from my
standpoint, mom and dad, but mom
especially, she she taught us
empathy almost to a fault, right? So,
she always said, you remember how she
always said, "Put yourself in the other
person's shoes." and she would always
say, "You never know what's going on in
someone else's home." And so I always
approached negativity toward me with
empathy. That was the first thing. It's
like, "Oh, what's what's what happened
to you? What happened to you that made
you so mean and evil?" The other thing
that our parents were really big on
was do not care what anybody else who's
not sitting at this table thinks. Mhm.
If we ever said somebody said something
and it affected the way we behaved,
that's when you saw anger from my
parents. That's when you get into
trouble. You got in trouble with my
parents when that I mean it was
crackback right away. What would they
say back? They they would be like, "So,
you're gonna tell you're telling me that
what whoever this is over here said is
more important to you than what you hear
around this table, then you can go live
with so- and so."
I mean, you know, if our admonitions in
our house were always conversations, it
was discussions. And you you knew when
your parents were disappointed. You knew
when you had struck a a nerve. And it
was never about, you know, just making a
mistake or, you know, it it was about
thinking in a way that felt oppressive,
internally oppressive. They didn't like
that kind of thinking in us. They wanted
us to feel our own power. They never
wanted us to surrender the way we
thought about ourselves to the rest of
the world because they probably
understood that they couldn't trust the
way the rest of the world would treat
us, right? So you can't you they they
knew that we couldn't be so locked into
what the world would say because the
world was grounded in racism and that
you know a little black boy more so even
my brother they were probably more
concerned with him because he was going
to encounter it every day as he got
taller and bigger and smarter because
all of the men in our lives had
experienced someone trying to knock them
down a peg or two. I think our parents
understood that that was waiting for
both of us and it was waiting for my
brother in particular. So, they wanted
to arm him with enough self-esteem to
fill him up at the table where he was
safe to give him the tools to just embed
in him a level of empathy so that he
wouldn't become angry because anger for
a young black boy was dangerous, you
know. Um, so there was a real clever way
of um allowing us to have these
conversations but filling us up with
empathy so that we could function in in
a racist society. Being underestimated,
it's a word that I saw throughout your
book and it's a word you you mentioned a
second ago.
You knew you were going into an
underestimated world, if I can call it
that, a world that was going to
underestimate you because of your race
and and things like that. But it's so
clear to me that you had your shoulders
back regardless. And I I spoke to
Valerie. Do you know Valerie? Of course
you know Valerie. You worked with
Valerie for many decades. And um she was
a sort of an early mental figure in your
life, Michelle. Yes, she was. And she
actually wrote me a letter about you.
She describes that she's never met
someone in her life that was so clear on
what they wanted to achieve in the world
in terms of the social good and the
impact they wanted to have but was so
unbelievably confident and high
conviction. And when I think about when
you went to Harvard and studied law
there was what 30% of the people
attending were were women and then a
tinier percentage were were black women.
And you were aware again of being
underestimated but again shoulders back
it seemed. Where does that come from in
you?
um
you living through the incorrectness of
that of that underestimation, right?
First of all, I grew up, you know,
fortunately in a predominantly black
neighborhood after white flight happened
where
um everyone assumed I was smart, right?
I grew up as a the saludiatoran in my
grammar school. I went to a top high
school. I, you know, so you I had the
the fortune of growing up in a
validating black environment, you know,
which is we talk about that a lot with
black students, whether they should be
going to H.B.CU. And what happens when
you get pulled out into a mixed
environment where you are so
underestimated so early, you know, you
you start, we talked about the messages
that you start telling yourself. I
didn't have that because when we were
young, you know, my mentors, my
teachers, the coaches, my dance
teachers, they were all people who if I
made a mistake or if they um doubted me,
it was because not because of my race,
it was because they I disappointed
somebody in some other way, right?
So by the time I hit Princeton,
thankfully I had enough internal data
that I could do a lot of things that I
was better, smarter, sharper than they
would give me credit for. And then it
was confirmed when I walked onto
Princeton's campus as an undergrad,
feeling a little intimidated because it
was an Ivy League school and I wasn't a
great test taker. Although I was an
outstanding student, I wasn't a
standardized good standardized test
taker. All those numbers said that I
shouldn't do well at Princeton. Um, and
so I came in as an affirmative action
kid. Sort of feeling like maybe I don't
belong in these ivory towers and maybe
these kids coming from these other
schools are really so much smarter and
better than I am. And then I sat on that
campus and I looked around and I was
like, "Oh my god, well, there's all
kinds of affirmative action that they
never talk about." You know, there's
wealth and legacy. Uh there there's
athletic uh affirmative action. There
were a lot of kids that were on that
campus and as I've
learned continue to gain access to these
seats of power that have nothing to do
with their raw academic ability. there.
She there there are a lot of bright kids
who go to these schools, but there are a
lot of bright kids whose parents get
them into these schools. And when I got
on campus and I came out of my first
semester with straight A's, I was like,
what's the what are you talking about?
What what are you who are you? Why are
you trying to mess with my head in this
way when you guys are you you're not
even working as hard as me? But that was
it was infuriating, but it was freeing
because I was like, I get it now. This
you're just trying to get into my head.
You're scared of me. You know, you don't
want me competing with you. And I think
it was at that that period going to one
of the top schools that I was like, I'm
done. I am done worrying about whether I
belong here. You know, this is a scam.
Um, so that I think that really I came
out of Princeton just feeling
like, you know, let me at him, you know,
you you know, for forget all this stuff.
And now I'm trying to tell other kids
that. It's like I'm coming down from the
mountaintop with the with the tablet of
truth and going, "Do not let these
people scam you. This is all a racket."
What's the scam? That you don't belong.
That they're smarter. That they work
harder. that they know more, that they
deserve this more than you do. That's
not it's it's just not true. And so from
then on, I was like, you prove that I
don't belong here. You know, I'm going
to sit at these tables and I am going to
run it from now on. Why Why am I
listening to you? Why don't you listen
to me? I think that experience for me
was freeing in an odd kind of way. And a
lot of kids don't get access. They're
just blocked out and they're it's sort
of like they're told, "Don't look behind
the curtain because you don't belong."
And they want us to think that way. I
stopped think thinking that way a long
time ago. The journey you've both been
on is is really really remarkable for so
many reasons, but it's also remarkable
for the pivots along the way. And um I
was reading about a bit of an identity
crisis that you had when you were 27 28
years old, Michelle, when you were you
were a lawyer. I was a lawyer. Oh yeah.
Sidley and Austin. Yes. Beautiful high
paid corporate attorney. U that allowed
me to buy a nice Saab drive attorney.
Driving attorney. Uh first job, first
real job I had had right out of uh uh
Harvard. Um because that's what you did,
you know, after you went go to law
school, top school, you recruited by the
top firms in the country and they offer
you exorbitant salaries. So at that age
as I started as a firstear associate I
was making more than my parents made
combined which seemed like something you
didn't turn down you know if you have
the opportunity to do that it's like
well yeah sure I'm going to work for a
fir firm but that's what I was really
doing all my life I was box checking I
was just because I was a good student
and I could do certain things that's
what I did you know I sort of understood
that there was a formula be a good
student show up do the work. Check. Got
that. Get good grades. Go to a
competitive high school. Went to a
magnet high school. Was this class
treasurer? Top of the class. Check. Got
it. I because I can do this. D. I'm just
marching through life. Check. Check.
Check. Apply to top college. Um, got
into Princeton, right? I'm am in.
Graduated the top of the class. Go to
law school. Why? I don't know. There
wasn't really a thought to why I went to
law school. It was just I don't know
what I'm going to do after graduate
school. Not going to be a doctor because
I don't like science or math. I like to
talk. I like to argue. And so why not go
to law school? So I applied to Harvard,
get in. You go to Harvard. You know that
that was just that was my thought
process. There wasn't a there wasn't
purpose. There wasn't what do I care
about? I didn't know what being a
corporate lawyer meant. I was just
checking boxes.
until I became a lawyer and and and a
lot of stuff happened in that year
besides me just joining uh Sidi and
Austin in that period of time. We lost
our father. Um he died very suddenly. Um
uh um one of my best friends from from
college uh Suzanne um died of lymphoma
and it was sudden. She was diagnosed in
December and she died in May. Really the
first time in my life where people that
weren't expected to die died. You know,
we had lost grandparents and
great-grandparents and and I I was
really having kind of an existential
crisis sitting on the 47th floor of my
in my beautiful office with a secretary
and a Saab in the garage thinking, why
me? Why am I here? Rather than Suzanne
because she was that friend was also the
dreamer, the person who wasn't
boxchecking. She went to Princeton, but
she traveled the world. She didn't go to
business school right away. And I always
thought, you got to get your life
together. You got to be on a path. And I
thought, thank God she didn't do that
because she didn't know she was going to
die. But instead of sitting in some
office building, she was living life and
trying on new things. And I realized I
hadn't done that for myself. Uh I all I
was doing was following a game plan. I
wasn't trying to figure out my purpose.
And at the same time, I met Barack
Obama. He showed up in my life as the
opposite of a box checker, but somebody
I describe in in my book as an ultimate
swerver. He did nothing by the book, but
he was brilliant and interesting. You
know, he didn't go to law school right
away. He worked as a community
organizer. He lived in different parts
of the world. He was really trying to
unpack life in a way that people in my
generation weren't trying to do. You
were just, you know, I was I was with
the black bgeoa, right? And people were
buying their homes and getting their
cars together and trying to make partner
at a firm. There was a very finite path.
And I hadn't explored anything else but
that. And I thought I I have to do
something more before I settle on this.
And I think Barack helped give me the
courage. you know, he was the person in
my ear that
said, "Why would you want to just stop
here and settle on this career when
there's so much out there that you
haven't tried, right? You can do this."
And I was like, "But I'm I I'm I'm
loaded down with
debt." And right around that time, we we
knew we were going to be together. We
knew we were going to be engaged. And he
was like, "We'll get we'll figure that
out." is like don't don't settle on
becoming a partner at a law firm because
of money. You know, it's like you need
to see the world in a different way and
we'll figure this out together. And so I
started swerving. Um I started trying
other things in life and never looked
back. Craig, when was the first time you
heard that your little sister had met a
guy called Mr. Obama? Well, she called
it called me up and said, "Hey, I met a
guy. I want to bring him by." And my
mom, my dad, and I were sitting on our
front porch and she pulls up in her nice
900 that you've heard a lot about. And
he gets out of the car and that was the
first time we met him. And what did you
think of him? Honestly,
honestly, I was like, you know, he may
last two months
because that's because of her because of
she'd be he'd do something and be like,
"Ah, that's a deal breaker." And he'd be
on on his way. And my mom I remember my
mom saying, "Well, at least he's tall."
We we were just meeting him like we
would meet somebody she'd she'd bring
by. But I never brought she didn't bring
a lot of guys by. So that's why we
thought it wouldn't last that long cuz
she didn't bring too many guys by. Yeah.
But why would you think it wouldn't
last? The people that didn't last you
didn't meet. But we heard about them.
Yeah. But they you never met them. Yeah.
Well,
I have known my sister. That's one of
those just sort of myths. Michelle's so
hard on men, you know. So, it's like
Yeah. I you know, say she was hard. I
brought him I brought him home and I
think there were there was one other
boyfriend that you met even though I had
plenty of boyfriends. I just you know I
met more than than two. Well, that's
because we went to school together.
Yeah. Right. Right. Those guys, but they
didn't come. But they didn't come home.
Well, okay. Well, I met them. Yeah, I
met them. But they didn't meet mom and
dad. No, they didn't meet mom and dad,
but that's cuz we weren't in Chicago.
Anyway, all that matters is really how
it turned out, right? So, this is the
sibling. It's like, you know, you
rejected him at first, right? Yeah.
Yeah. Because he uh Barack was I I was
assigned to be his advisor. And that
didn't mean I was his boss, but every I
was a first year associate. So they
tried to pair first years sort of wi-i
with new summer associates just to help
get them acclimated and to kind of give
them advice to sort of mentor them for
the summer. So I was his mentor mentor,
right? So he comes in, he's late. So I'm
thinking, okay, this guy's trifling
because we didn't in the Robinson
family, we didn't do late, but he was
raining and he didn't have an umbrella
and so he was a little wet. Um, so I was
a little annoyed, but he he stood up and
he was tall and he was more handsome
than his picture. So I sort of thought,
"Oh, okay." And not what I expected. So
um I took him uh around the office, got
him settled into his office, took him
out to lunch for the uh that first day
and we talked for like hours and I knew
that we were going to be friends. He was
smart, he was funny, had a good sense of
humor, didn't take himself too
seriously. So, we we clicked right off
the bat. And over the course of the
summer, we actually became really good
friends. I was even trying to introduce
him to some of my friends, my
girlfriends, saying, "There's this
really cute guy who's my adviser."
because in my mind there wasn't any way
that the the the few black uh asso
associates there who both went to
Harvard were going to date in my mind I
was like that's going to be tacky that's
expected right and I was just sort of
into doing what wasn't not doing the
expected right so my mind went somewhere
else I was like h meet all these
wonderful beautiful women that I know
you know um and after a couple of
outings. He said, "Well, why don't we go
out?" And I was like, "No way are we
going to go out. That's just not going
to happen. We're friends." And he was
sort of like, "Huh? Well, why?" And he
made the case. I said, "Well, you know,
I don't think it looks right." And he
said, "Who cares about how it looks?"
And so he made his Barack Obama case
over a couple of weeks. And finally, I
was like, "Okay, we'll go out on one
date." And so he planned a a after that
it was over. It was a full day date
where he pulled out all the stops. He uh
we I'm sure I picked him up because I
had the nice car and we went to the art
institute where he showed me his suave,
you know, view of art and we had lunch
at the museum and then we walked from
the art institute down Michigan Avenue
north. So we walked hand in hand, talked
slowly and you know then we went and had
dinner on top of Lake Point Tower which
was a beautiful view of the city and
then we I think ended the evening
watching going to Spike Le's do the
right thing. So I mean he had planned
you know culture you know art you know
lovely stroll and slowly I was like okay
maybe I I you know I spoke too soon you
know maybe there is something more here
but yes that's a long way of saying I
did say no for a a a good month or two
and but by the end of the summer we were
I think it was that summer by the end of
this summer I was introducing him to my
my family. You both have that throughine
through your story of ticking the boxes.
Mhm. And then eventually it's kind of
what we were talking about yesterday on
your show where if you have sometimes
your preconception has to fail you.
Yeah, that's right. You have to feel it
for you to understand that maybe a pivot
is needed in your life. And I was the
same when I was talking about my early
journey. Um Valerie, this very
interesting character in your life. This
is the letter I found it that Valerie
wrote into me. And she's talking about
the pivot you made from being a lawyer
to leaving that law firm and and going
in pursuit of something else. What was
the something else you were pursuing
before I read what Valerie said to me? I
had no idea. Um because I didn't know
anything. U but I started with what I I
had to spend some time thinking,
journaling about what did I care about.
What was the journal question? What
brought me joy? You know, of all the
things that I was doing in my life, what
was the thing when I had it on my
calendar that I would jump out of bed
for that would change my the way I felt
about the day? And it always had to do
it went back to mentoring because while
I was doing all this stuff in law in in
my education, I was always finding ways
to help younger kids understand how to
get here. So it was the mentoring piece
that Craig mentioned, you know, we never
talked about that when we think about
our our parents. Um that brought me
absolute joy, you know. So I I started
really trying to listen to that
self-interested part of me, you know,
it's like what made me happy? I never
asked myself that. I al I always did
what I thought I was supposed to do. and
making money was one of the things that
you were supposed to do if you were
anyone who had an opportunity to get an
Ivy League education. That was really
all they talked about. That's all they
showed you. You know, there wasn't a
course or major in helping people. Um,
you know, there wasn't a course on
working with young kids. You know,
there's no major for that, especially in
the Ivy Leagues. So, I know I knew
nothing about the nonprofit world. I
knew nothing about NOS's. Well, Valerie
said, she said the opposite. I'm joking.
I'm joking. I'm
joking. The day I met Michelle Obama
changed my life forever. I'll never
forget the moment she strolled into my
office for an interview, dressed in all
black, hair elegantly pulled back. I was
struck by the confidence that she
carried herself with. She looked me
right in the eye when she shook my hand.
She was so poised and self assured that
it was hard to believe that she was only
27 years old. Michelle told me about her
life, how she grew up in the Southside,
how much love and support her parents
poured into her and her brother Craig. I
asked her why she was considering public
service rather than a much more
lucrative path as a partner in a law
firm. And she said that she had recently
lost her dad and her best friend within
a year. And their deaths were a painful
reminder of the finitness of life and
the importance of making it purposeful.
and how she knew that her abilities
could lead her to make a difference in
the lives of others to serve and to give
back to the city that she had grown up.
I was so in awe of her clarity of
purpose, determination, and
vulnerability that I offered her a job
on the spot.
That was close, right? It was the same.
Like, what did Valerie say?
And at that time in your life, you know,
those early 30s, what's what's going on
with um Mr. Obama? Oh, by then he was uh
he had written his book because he was
the president of the Harvard Law Review.
The president of the Harvard Law Review
is the top student at the top law school
in the world. So, and he was the first
black student to be elected um president
of the Harvard Law Review. Um and that
garnered a lot of attention for him. We
were dating at the time and so he got a
book contract to write a story, Dreams
from My Father. Um, which I thought was
who writes a book at your age, right?
You know, but he was like, "Yeah, I
might as well tell my story." And, you
know, and it was money, right? He got in
advance and we were engaged, so he was
working on that project, but he was
still trying to figure out what he was
going to do. And when you're the
president of the Harvard Law Review,
basically the world of law is open to
you. The normal path is that you clerk
for an appellet judge um for a year or
two and then you go on to to clerk for
the Supreme Court. Then you know you go
on to do appellet work. You you know you
you have offers from every law firm. You
are in demand or you can do policy or
whatever. That was the normal path. I
was like so are you going to clerk? He
was like why would I clerk? So he didn't
work at any of the big firms. He went to
a very small firm that was doing public
interest work. So he wasn't making a lot
of money. He was doing what I was doing.
He was going the opposite direction of
all the things that was were supposed to
make us money. But he was like, I money
isn't why I'm doing this. I'm trying to
figure out how I can best use my skills
to impact the most people. So he was
doing 50 million jobs and we were
cobbling together our payments for our
student loans at the time which were
more than our mortgage. We had bought a
condominium. We were on our way to
building our lives together. But we were
in deep debt. So while we were both
pursuing our deep love of being in the
community, we our incomes were going in
the opposite direction of where they
were supposed to go. But we were in this
together. you know, politics hadn't
really come into the fold yet. It wasn't
a part of the conversation, but we were
both kind of on these parallel paths
kind of figuring out how do we take all
these skills and all this energy and
help people. I was working in the city.
Um, he was working everywhere else and
writing a book. Um, and we were just
kind of, you know, we we were sort of
plotting ahead.
Business takes me all over the world and
I travel about 50 weeks a year. And up
until recently, one of the challenges I
continued to face was staying connected
as soon as I landed somewhere new. The
reality is I don't have time to wait
around and sort out SIM cards while I'm
on the go. So, a few months ago, I tried
something called Aro for the first time,
and they are now a sponsor of today's
episode. Heirl is the world's first eIM
store. It's entirely digital. No SIM
cards are needed at all, and you can
keep the same phone number you have now.
It means that you can get reliable data
in over 200 destinations with instant
access to a digital eSIM card with a
click of a button. When you buy your
first ALO eSIM, you can get $3 off by
using code
DOAC3. For me, being able to land Switch
on my phone and get back to work is
gamechanging, and Ero makes this
possible. Install ALO today to get $3
off your first eSIM with code DOAC3 at
checkout. That's
DOAC3 when you download the Heirl app.
I guess I'm seeking advice from both of
you on uh on love and romance and
relationships because in your you know
I'm in my early 30s now and when I
looked at both of your stories of love
in your your 30s,
it's not a straight line. Oh no. No,
it's not a straight line to say the
least. Um, Michelle, you talk about
going to marriage counseling with with
Brock. What does someone like me at 32
years old who is in a relationship, who
is aggressively pursuing a career,
because I feel like I've got to build
and build and build and set my family up
for the future. What advice would you
both give me about navigating love
through that part of your career where
it's go go go? M for somebody with your
personality in particular. Um my advice
would be that
um you know I could see you thinking,
you know, if we're if if if I've got my
stuff together and I've got my path
going over here and you've got your path
going over on over there, you know, as
long as we're both trudging along, you
know, and pushing, we're going to be
good. And generally that that can work
because you can be two independent
beings out there with, you know,
basically slaying your own dragons,
right? Making the choices about which
dragons you slay and how, you know, how
how much armor you want to use. You
know, you're you're independent people
and that feels good right now until your
first and most important joint project
happened, which you told me you want.
you have kids, right? That's oftent
times when the rub happens because when
you when you bring life into the world,
you
know, that's the that's the project
where you can't do that independently.
You can't you can't be on one path and
your partner on another because raising
those kids and making them as whole as
as you'd want them to be has so little
to do with the dragon you're slaying now
than it does with how you partner and
engage and and and make choices together
on this these little creatures that
you're going to love more than anything
in the world. And you're not gonna want
to get that project wrong, but you've
got to work with your partner. You got
to communicate. And that's when it gets
really hard. Is that when it got hard
for you? Yeah. Yeah. Because, you know,
when you're independent operators in the
world, it, you know, he's off, he's
traveling, I'm traveling. You know,
maybe I don't see him during the week
and then on Saturday, whoa, it's great.
I love you. I missed you. This was so
cool. Tell me about your life. and oh
this is and it's sexy and it's all of
this right and it feel and you're you're
moving and you know and you also are
okay having a break it's like let me
miss you for a little bit so I don't
care that you're traveling or that
you're everywhere but the minute there's
a little baby that is waking someone up
and if there's one person that's
carrying the burden of that you know if
one person's dream stops because they're
taking on the lion share of of things
and you're still going to the gym and
you're still slaying your dragons at the
same rate and you haven't looked over at
your partner who maybe is now stuck at
home because she's breastfeeding or she
made a set of choices to make this
little creature work and you guys
haven't had a conversation about that
and what that balance looks like because
you're just slaying your dragon at the
same rate. Oh, there's going to be
problems. You know, there's going to be
resentment. There's going to be fatigue.
There's going to be measuring and
counting and all the things. So I think
it's just important to communicate now
to start doing the work of make making
sure that you're def you guys are
defining your one life together that
you're deciding together now what
dragons are going to be slaying
and who gets to do what when you know um
and what does that feel like you know
are you going to be working all the time
are you going to be traveling all the
time on the road is she coming with you.
How does she feel about that? Did you
have that conversation? No. No, we
didn't have that conversation. No, cuz I
didn't know that that was a thing that
you had to worry about because when
you're in the midst of it, it when
you're in the midst of pursuing your own
independent journeys, it's beautiful,
right? It is. It's like I'm independent,
he's independent, we we get along, and
then all of a sudden someone's legs are
cut up from under them, you know? You
know, someone is making a different set
of sacrifices that wasn't negoti that
weren't negotiated because of children.
Because of children and because of life.
You had some pregnancy struggles. Yes.
And I I've spoken to many women on this
show who have been through similar
pregnancy struggles. And it's something
that I've it's actually a big
conversation in my life at the moment,
but also just some of my friends in my
life around trying to get pregnant um
and the IVF journey which you went on.
What do women who are struggling need to
understand and how did you feel when you
were
contemplating the IVF journey and when
you started to have struggles uh
conceiving without IVF? Well, it's the
thing, you know, because we don't talk
about our bodies and women's health and
there's just not a lot of conversation
about marriage or pregnancy or any of
this. Our parents don't talk about it.
Their parents before them don't talk
about it. Right? So, you imagine your
life and as you're checking boxes, I'm
waiting. I've delayed having kids. I
found the love of my life and now I'm
going to get pregnant. And no one tells
you that there is really a biological
clock. Like that's not false. You know,
we have partner in podcast Dr. Sharon
Malone who wrote a book grown woman talk
where she's talking she's sort of
ripping the the the the curtain off of
women's health questions. And in a
conversation with her, she reminded us
that women, we are born with a finite
set of eggs and we don't get anymore.
And every month we're losing them. And
so there is a period of time usually,
and it's different for everyone, usually
in your 30s where you go from f fertile
to not. And it's like falling off of a
cliff. And I'm like, why didn't anybody
tell me this? I know. Why? Why? Why
wasn't people why weren't people talking
about this? So, by the time I we started
really trying, which which worked
perfectly for our careers and maturing
and having everything set, right?
Because that's what we're we're trying
to get everything set. Unlike our
parents who, you know, had us, we lived
in a little bitty apartment, you know,
one income. Our generation were worrying
about I want everything set. I I
guarantee you, you have things way more
set than any any of our parents had
before they started having kids. But
we're waiting for everything to be
perfect. No friction. We don't want any
friction, right? And while we're we're
waiting for our lives to be perfect,
that biological clock is ticking. So,
you start trying and you it's not
working. That's when you go to the
doctor and they tell you,
"Oh, you're you're running out of eggs.
This is normal. I mean, you're going to
have trouble getting pregnant and so try
a little bit and then now it's time for
IVF. Um, if you can afford it, which it
wasn't covered by insurance at the time.
So, you know, it's just a shock to the
system and as some as people who like
learning and like knowledge, you really
sort of feel jipped. Yeah. You know,
that why why is this such a secret? Um,
which is why I talk about it openly and
I talk about miscarriages because the
other thing I learned is like most
pregnancies, a good percentage of them
end in miscarriage. That people have
been having miscarriages for years but
not talking about it. So when it happens
to you, a box checker, somebody that
thought life was going to be so and you
did all the right things, to have things
not work out and to know that it was
going to be that way and nobody told you
so that you could be prepared for it, it
just it was a blow. And then as a woman,
you're walking around owning the blow as
if it's your fault, you know. Um, and so
you're carrying around that burden. And
that can become the first pressure point
in a marriage because emotionally you've
got a woman that is carrying all of
this. Feeling like a failure, feeling
not having anyone to talk about, having
her hormones go up and down literally,
right? Probably dealing with depression
and maybe some postpartum. Still
working, still slaying dragons, still on
the path, but she's carrying it all on
her own. And then if you do IVF, the
bulk of the work, the shots, the the we
are the we are the the the petri dish in
the IVF process. You show up, you come
in a cup, and ooh, yay, good for you,
right? And you're a little mad about
that, too, because women have to get
shots every week,
and you have to go back and forth in
between having your job, your
high-powered job, and keeping it all
together. You're at the doctor's office
every month trying to count your eggs
and hoping that you're producing eggs
and then you have to go through the
procedure and then you have to be
pregnant for nine
months as your partner is going to the
gym and keeping his figure and you know
all of that you know so it's a long way
of saying there are just many natural
reasons why marriage
infertility trying to have
kids makes things difficult. It's like I
I try to tell couples, of course it's
hard. Just listen to what I said, right?
Like it's pro if you're having some
issues in your marriage. It's not you,
it's the process of marriage. It's just
all hard because guess what happens when
it all works out right? You know what?
You end up
with babies.
little people with their own sense of
everything. They mess you up. You love
them dearly, but they're a hassle
and they're demanding and they have
their own whims. And now they're in your
world in in your partnership. They are
you you they they are factored into
everything. So even when everything
works out and you have the 3.2 two kids
and you got everything right, it's still
going to be hard because now you're
you're developing a life, right? So, I
talk about these things because I think
that people give up too quickly on on
marriage, right? because there is so
much friction built in to the equation.
And if you're not getting help, talking
about it, going to therapy, just
understanding how things are changing
and how do you continuously renegotiate
your relationship with your partner. I I
just see people quitting because they
look at me and Barack and go # couple
goals, you know, and I'm like, it's
hard. It's hard for us, too. But I
wouldn't trade it. You know, he is, as
the young people say, he is my person.
Was there ever a moment where you
thought, you know, there are the moments
where I'm
like,
right, but it was it real? No. No. No.
There's there was never really a full
moment. There were moments when I was
resentful. There were moments when I was
mad. There were moments when I didn't
feel like I got enough attention.
But it's like, don't you feel that in
your relationship right now? Yeah. You
know, so it's just me understanding.
Yeah, I was mad, but I forgot even why I
was mad. Right. That's so it's like, was
I really that mad? Oh, did I say that?
I'm sorry. I didn't really mean that.
So, no, in the end, you know, mm- no,
we're, you know, and the beauty of my
husband and my our partnership is that
neither one of us was ever really ever
going to quit at it cuz that's not who
we are. And I know that about him. He
knows that about me, you know. Um, so
no, both of your lives change because of
a decision that former President Barack
Obama decides to make, which is to run
for public office. And that is has a
profound impact on both of your lives
because it's the most powerful job in
the world. It is you become the most
famous family in the
world. When he said that he was going to
do that, did you believe that he was
capable of it? Uh yeah, that was the the
problem is
like, you know, I I I knew that in my
heart I knew that he would make a
phenomenal president. Um and as I've
written in in in the light, um uh the
the truth was is that my initial
reaction was like, "Oh no, oh my god,
don't do this." It had everything to do
with having the foresight of knowing
what this would do to our lives. I mean,
I was projecting that if you win, which
I thought he could and should. He would
be somebody that I would want as my
president. It was all about this is
going to, you know, our kids are little.
We're going to have to move. How do you
raise kids in the White House? Um, it's
dangerous. Is the first black potential
president. We knew there would be death
threats. there were just all the how
would we afford it because it's it's
expensive to live in the White House as
many people don't know I mean much is
not covered um you're paying for every
food every bit of food that you eat you
you know you're not paying for housing
and the staff in it but everything even
travel if you're not traveling with the
president if your kids are coming on a
bright star which is the first lady's
plane we had to play pay for their
travel to be on the plane it is an
expensive
proposition and you're running for two
years and not earning an income. Um, so
all of that was in my mind. Um, how
would we manage this? So my fears were
uh what came from the fact that I
thought he could win, you know, cuz if I
maybe way in the back of my mind I was
hoping that maybe he wouldn't, you know,
that this would be the last thing he
would do.
Um, but I knew he had it in him uh to
make this happen. This one change has
transformed how my team and I move,
train, and think about our bodies. When
Dr. Daniel Lieberman came on the DEO, he
explained how modern shoes with their
cushioning and support are making our
feet weaker and less capable of doing
what nature intended them to do. We've
lost the natural strength and mobility
in our feet and this is leading to
issues like back pain and knee pain. I'd
already purchased a pair of Viva
barefoot shoes. So, I showed them to
Daniel Lieberman and he told me that
they were exactly the type of shoe that
would help me restore natural foot
movement and rebuild my strength. But, I
think it was planticitis that I had
where suddenly my feet started hurting
all the time. And after that, I decided
to start strengthening my own foot by
using the Viva Barefoot. And research
from Liverpool University has backed
this up. They've shown that wearing
vivarfoot shoes for 6 months can
increase foot strength by up to
60%. Visit vivo
barefoot.com/doac and use code diary 20
from my sponsor for 20% off. A strong
body starts with strong feet. This has
never been done before. A newsletter
that is ran by 100 of the world's top
CEOs. All the time people say to me,
they say, "Can you mentor me? Can you
get this person to mentor me? How do I
find a mentor? So, here is what we're
going to do. You're going to send me a
question. And the most popular question
you send me, I'm going to text it to 100
CEOs, some of which are the top CEOs in
the world running a hundred billion
dollar companies. And then I'm going to
reply to you via email with how they
answered that question. You might say,
"How do you hold on to a relationship
when you're building a startup? What is
the most important thing if I've got an
idea and don't know where to start?" We
email it to the CEOs. They email back.
We take the five, six top best answers.
We email it to you. I was nervous
because I thought the marketing might
not match the reality. But then I I saw
what the founders were replying with and
their willingness to reply and I thought
actually this is really good and all
you've got to do is sign up completely
free. Did you ask for any commitments or
promises if he were to win?
I you know it it wasn't very thoughtful.
Um, I told him that he definitely had to
quit smoking because he was still toying
with smoking. He was in it and not in
it. Um, and we had to have enough of a
nest egg so that, you know, we could
that we wouldn't be just financially
broke at the end of it. And, you know, I
thought that that that was going to cut
it, right? because we weren't in really
we we we were just starting to make uh
decision moves where we were covering
the income that we lost making our
purposeful moves. So I kind of thought
that was going to be the deal breaker.
But then he was chosen to give the
speech at the Democratic National
Convention and he just blew up. And as a
result of that, and maybe I'm getting it
out of order, Dreams for My Father went
back on the bestsellers list. He brought
wrote Audacity of Hope, you know, so
there was all this income that was being
generated from his book sales. And he
kind of looked at me like, I think we're
okay. And I'm like,
darn. Um, so I I didn't know enough to
know what to ask for. I mean, we were
flying blind. I didn't know what that
journey was going to be and what I would
need to negotiate for myself. And that
was a bit problematic. It was
problematic not to know what I needed.
What should you have said? Oh.
Um, I should
have said that I
needed his
team to really truly value that he had a
family, you know, that I I shouldn't
have just said, well, this is what it
takes to get this done. I mean, it was
almost like the consultants that sit
around. It was almost like this is the
way it has to be. And remember the the
legacy of the presidential office
doesn't recognize families. It it is not
designed, you know, you get in there and
it all revolves around the
commanderin-chief who has always been a
man. And the whole system of it doesn't
really take into account that there's a
wife and kids and their needs and their
the demands on them. Um, so I wound up
having to fight for a lot of stuff on my
own. So if I had known these things and
maybe maybe Laura Bush knew more than I
did because the Bushes had been in the
White House, maybe, you know, you know,
there I I think about maybe there's some
world where people knew more about this
thing than we did to understand the
impacts. But there are also generational
differences. I was a very different
first lady. uh not terribly different
from Hillary Clinton, but it was a
different time. Uh we had small kids in
the White House and that didn't happen
often. There were just uh accommodations
and and and ways that the the West Wing
did not think about
or or work to fully protect all of us in
the process as a unit. And so if I had
known what I know knew now, I I would
have asked for different things, but I
ultimately I had to push to to get the
things that we needed to be able to
operate as a family. Even when it came
down to how the Secret Service protected
little kids, you know, um the girls had
to have a detail, right? So they started
school in second grade and fifth grade
in armed cars with primarily men with
guns going into a new school. Um
strangers that they did not know and the
details weren't they weren't practiced
on going to Sidwell's second grade uh
schoolyard. So we had to basically work
on how do you how do you do this for
little kids, you know. So a lot of times
details just flood through. They they
they continuously move through. It was
important for me that we find two detail
leaders that stayed with the girls for
most of their time until they became
teenagers because it was sort of like
you know these people, right? At least
they get to know. they couldn't just
have strange men coming throughout. Um,
and we had to kind of fight for that.
Um, so those that's just one example of
the what living under those things and
trying to raise small children, you
know, the kind of things that the guys
in the West Wing weren't thinking about
as they were fixing the financial crisis
and dealing with Syria and on and on and
on. I was trying to make sure that our
kids came out of that process not crazy
um and whole. Being the first black
first lady in the White
House, the public scrutiny that that
comes with is a unique type of scrutiny.
Mhm. Being the first lady anyway comes
with tremendous scrutiny. Absolutely.
Since stepping reluctantly into public
life, I've been held up as the most
powerful woman in the world and taken
down as an angry black woman. I've
wanted to ask my detractors which part
of that phrase matters to them the most.
Is it angry or black or woman? I've
smiled for photos with people who call
my husband horrible names on national
television, but still want a framed
keepsake for their mantle. I've heard
about the swampy parts of the internet
that question everything about me, right
down to whether I'm a woman or man. A
sitting US congressman has made fun of
my butt. I've been hurt. I've been
furious.
But mostly I've tried to laugh this
stuff off.
Craig, if that was my little
sister, public scrutiny, elevated to the
the highest office in the land,
I'll ask you the question. How how would
how did you feel? So I that
that's let me back up. Because I had
been a basketball coach at a big
conference, I always had to tell them,
"Don't worry about what people say in
the newspaper. I'm doing exactly what I
love to do." Mhm. And that doesn't
bother me at all. Okay. But then once
they got in the White
House, I had to tell myself that. Yeah.
because I knew that they were doing the
best that they could do for the most
people no matter what anybody said.
But because it's my little sister and
brother-in-law and my mom was in the
White House and my nieces, I would I
there were times where I would find
myself becoming enraged and I'd have to
coach myself
to I know they're doing the best they're
doing they they can do for the most
people and I would not want anybody else
sitting in that seat but my sister and
brother-in-law. And that's how I got
through eight years of that. Because
it's relentless. It is relentless. It's
relentless. It is global. It is unfair.
And it's mean. It's just mean. And you
know the I' I've leaned back on the
lessons I learned from my parents a long
time ago. I wasn't worried about what
anybody said who wasn't at this
table. And um and and I I
coached I I counseledled my family, my
immediate family, the same thing cuz our
kids, we our older kids were old enough
to read the papers and read the read the
news and and things online,
but Meech always talks about
this. In order to get through that, she
always says she needed the village of
her friends and family. And I just
wanted to be a supportive piece of that.
And we tried to get out there as much as
we could and make it as normal as you
can, you know, having Thanksgiving in
the White House. You know, that that's
an oxymoron almost having a normal
Thanksgiving in the White House. But we
tried to make it as normal as we could.
And yourself, how how does one deal with
such scrutiny? The scrutiny occurs for
eight years as the you know the public
are at war with different opinions and
ideas and often the president is seen as
the the villain or the hero in that
context and the family is obviously
impacted by that. But then even beyond
the White House it's it's relentless.
What is the is there a framework? Is
there an underlying belief? Is there a
set of values? You know it go it goes
back to what we learned earlier. I think
I approach everything with empathy. Um,
and Barack does too, and he he helps
keep me in check. Um, because he is so
smart and he believes in ideas and he
understands context in
history. You know, we we are always
putting these times, these moments into
a greater context. And we're trying to
understand where people's rage,
ignorance, hatred, whatever it is, where
it comes from. And it usually doesn't
have anything to do with us, you know.
It has to do
with the state of the world, you know,
and the world in this country is unfair
for way more people than it is fair to.
And it impacts people of all races. And
folks are angry and they're scared. Um,
and they don't have enough opportunity.
And when people are put in that
position, they lash out. They're mean.
That's when they're they're you know we
we we otherize people because it gives
us a sense of stability. We pick on
someone has to be a little more
oppressed than us. Um but that doesn't
make what they say or feel true. You
know that's you know just because you
say it or think it about me and the way
that I had to overcome the racist low
expectations of us in our childhood.
It's the same thing. It's like, you're
not mad at me. You don't understand a
lot about the world. And you've been
told a lot of things about who people of
my skin color are. You've been taught to
fear me because of the history of our
country, because of what you're going
through. And when you put yourself in
other people's shoes, you I I do get why
people are afraid. I do understand it.
And also Barack helps me remember which
I experienced myself, you know, he says
this is still the country that elected
Barack Obama twice, you know, and people
in this country are proud of that.
There's a very small percentage of
people who would never ever in their
lifetime uh want a black man to tell
them how to get down the street to the
grocery store, right? Um they can't hear
it. But this this country is bigger than
that, right? Um and we saw it. We
experienced it as much hatred or you
know conflict or ridicule. We we had so
much love, so much goodwill, you know,
so many people who tell us even today we
miss you guys, you know, and it doesn't
look like any you'd be surprised at what
corners of the world and our daughters
felt it and feel it, right? That is
true, too. We are in a really tough time
right now and we are being led sadly by
people who are are are not being in my
opinion their best selves um for
whatever reasons they have, whatever is
moving them to to push this country in
this direction. Whatever hurts they
have. Billionaires have their hurts too.
you know, business leaders, people in
power who want power and haven't
understand understood their why, you
know, can lead us down some dark
tunnels, right? But it's that empathy
for me um that that ability to kind of
give it some perspective that allows me
not to take all that hate in and to
really, you know, see the light in
people. you know, it's just the better
way to live. It keeps us from being
embittered. Uh, and it keeps us hopeful
and it keeps us working for for people,
you know. Um, so it's it's kind of a
necessity to get through it.
Marian, your wonderful mother, she was a
prominent figure throughout that time in
the White House. Oh, yeah.
What did she give you that helped you
through that journey of being thrust
into the very very very highest mountain
in public service? What role did she
play? What force was she at that time
for you both?
For me, she continued to be
that soft place to land, you know, the
place where she always saw me. Always
always saw who I was.
Um, and she was that soft place for our
girls. She was common sense right in the
middle of the White House, you know, in
that big house. People, you know, just
with her sheer presence and her wisdom,
you know, that old-fashioned wisdom, she
was the center of that house. Everyone
came to her door and sat in her room and
sucked up her wisdom. The butlers, the,
you know, the florists, the
housekeepers, the chefs, you know, they
they were all motherred in some way by
her. Um, and so she was that for me for
sure. I can still see her in your face
as you reflect. She's there. She is
there. I see it in his face more. You
know how you you don't see yourself in
your like I don't think I look like him
at all, right? But he looks just like my
mother, right? How did that loss impact
the family? It's 2024, so it's fairly
recent. Yeah. Yeah. It's still it's
still painful. Um but, you know, I'll go
back to what I I said at the very
beginning when you talked about the
values we had. The underlying value was
unconditional love.
And Misha and I knew that our mom loved
us. And we and and even more
importantly, she knew we loved her. She
knew her grandkids loved her. So while
her dying was traumatic and
disappointing and
sad, I always feel like she knew where
we stood and she was it was it was when
when she was uh right before she passed
away and she we knew she was going to be
leaving us and I said uh you know Meech
and Barack are on our way and she was
like oh that's nice and she just said
that that was
Yeah. There was nothing left unsaid.
Yeah. Yeah. And there's just there was
there's just a piece. Yeah. Yeah. I I I
just miss her. Mhm. Right. But I feel
like she knows how we feel about her and
that's that's always comforting. And
speaking of comfort, that's how I felt
when she was in the White
House for
them cuz I didn't have to worry about
them when she was
there. Have you processed the the grief?
Have you been able to?
I'm sure I have more than he does cuz he
doesn't process stuff. He just keeps
working through it. But yeah. Yeah. I I
think I've I pro I for me
um
making choices for me. I feel like now I
have permission to do what I want to do.
I think part of our podcast is part of
that legacy. Um because at least for me
as a woman, I think at
61, I'm finally owning my wisdom. um in
a way that I don't, you know, I think it
takes women until we're about 60 to be
like, I I think I know a thing or two,
but that wisdom comes from her. And
she's she was she's our our last line of
elder wisdom. And so now we're up, we're
next up, believe it or not, me and Craig
and our family, we're the we're the
ones. Um, so IMO, um, in my opinion, our
podcast is sort of that offering back.
It's like, all right, let's let's keep
up the mentoring that we were taught,
you know, let's let's let's create our
table and be a place where people can
come for the little bit of advice and
conversation in the same way that you're
doing, Stephen. It's like when you when
you learn
something, the way you hone in on it is
that you keep teaching it to other
people, right? You said that, right?
Um and so this is sort of helping us
continue to you know by helping others
which is a thing we both get great joy
from that mentoring just being able to
you know have this conversation here and
maybe somebody's going to get something
from it that I missed when I was their
age that brings us joy. It's like we're
here for a reason other than making a
bunch of money and you know living a
nice life or being famous. It's like
maybe we can help somebody. Permission.
Yeah. I was watching the coverage over
your decision, your decision to sort of
take back some of your control and not
go to Trump's inauguration. Uhhuh. Is
that one of those key moments in your
life where you did take back control?
Absolutely. Absolutely. What was the
thinking behind that decision?
Um, what do I want to do in this moment?
you know, as a boxcheing a person who
has been box checking her whole life,
doing the right thing.
Um, trying to always be an example,
always going high. Um, I I think I now I
earned a little bit about how do I feel,
you know, do I want to up in my life and
and and take this trip and leave my
peace and my children for this? I don't
didn't have to. That that was my choice.
And I I was not I would have never made
that choice. I would have always done
what what I thought was the the right
thing to do for other people to set an
example. And I I I think I just told
myself, I think I've done enough of
that. And if I haven't, then I never
will. It'll never be enough. So, let me
start now. This is the perfect time to
start. Um, so yeah, obviously off the
back of that people start to swell
rumors that there's an issue with you
and Brock and there's it was coming. I
can I mean you can say it yourself, but
I don't think that needs to be
addressed.
What I will say, you know me now well
enough, Stephen, is if I were having
problems with my husband, everybody
would know about it. If you're like, and
let me tell you, and then and he would
know it and everybody would know it. I'm
not a martyr. I'm not, you know, and I
would I would be problem solving in pro
public and be like, "Let me tell you
what he did." Listen podcast now as
well. So we were wait but if they were
having a problem Yeah. I'd be doing a
podcast with him.
Your your podcast is incredible and I
highly recommend everybody goes and
checks it out. Um I'm going to link it
below on the screen. I was fortunate
enough to be invited on it yesterday and
we had a wonderful conversation in
there. IM O in my opinion it's a you
know it's a reflection of this kind of
conversation. It's human. It's a
discovery of life. You're bringing
people on there that have wisdom to
share but you're passing through that to
understand the world that we're all
living in and the struggles that we're
all contending with. So it's a wonderful
wonderful space on the internet. I
highly recommend my viewers go and check
it out on Spotify, on YouTube, wherever
you get your podcasts. It's a must
listen in my my opinion because it's so
rare that we get an insight and a window
into the the family, but also just the
human story of everything that you've
both been through in your lives as a
really successful coach, as a stock
broker, as the first lady, as a mother,
um, and then everything you're going to
do thereafter. You're helping me
navigate the world and you help other
people navigate the world because not
everybody has that foundation. Not
everybody has the parents at home.
Everybody has, especially in black
communities, not everybody has the
mentors and you're vicariously mentoring
the world through that show. So, please
do continue. It's a wonderful thing to
get to podcast and I was so happy to
hear when you joined the industry. We
have a closing tradition. Yes. And the
closing tradition on this podcast is
that the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're leaving it for. Okay. So the
question that's been left for you both
is if there is one person in your life
that you have been afraid of putting up
a boundary with but know you need to who
would it be? Now you don't have to name
them but I guess this question is just
about boundaries. Yeah.
The inauguration might have been the
opposite. Yeah. I think I've kind of
done that. Yeah. Yeah. But at this age
we got our boundaries well set. Uh I I
think this that's a that's that's
um I because we're not naming a who I
think it's the act of practicing setting
boundaries period. Right. And I'm I'm
having that conversation with my
daughters now. I mean, it takes a lot of
work to learn how to say no and how not
to be um people pleasers, which I think
there are more of us out there than we'd
like to admit. It takes practice and it
takes decades of practice. Um, and I am
constantly giving my my girls tips on
how to do it, how to politely do it, how
to, you know, how to not jam yourself
up, how to not say yes right away, how
to take a moment and say, "Let me think
about that." You know, some of a
boundary is just saying, "Wait, I don't
have to give you an answer right now.
let me go back and sit in it in the the
request and figure out whether it works
for me. And so many of us as pleasers,
we're trying to give people an an answer
right away. And it's hard to look
someone in the face and say no. So I
think it takes practice, even practice
in the wording of it. And then the older
you get, the easier it gets because
guess what? to realize your no doesn't
usually change anyone else's life. You
know, they might be disappointed, but
guess what? It all they will find the
next, you know, person that they'll ask.
The world continues. None of us are that
important. Um, and people can deal with
a little disappointment every now and
then. And with that, I thank you both.
It's such an honor to get to meet you
and um to learn so much from you. And
yeah, I uh the rise of your family, the
grace, the humility, and the way that
you've conducted yourself has been a
huge source of inspiration for me as a
young black man that's navigating the
world and that's looking up to role
models um that aren't often um as in
close proximity in our lives. So, thank
you so much. I I can't tell you how much
you had a profound impact on on me
thousands of miles away in a small
little village in the southwest of
England. had a profound impact on me in
shaping the man that I became in my life
and that's a credit to your family and
it's just the greatest honor that I got
to speak to you both today. So, thank
you. It's been a a pleasure. Absolute
treat to be spending time with you.
Thanks for having us and hopefully it
won't be the last. I hope not. Yeah.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor?
If you like the show and you like what
we do here and you want to support us,
the free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so
[Music]
much. Heat. Heat.